Title: 2 cents
Date: 2014-01-30 17:50
Author: sideproject
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 2-cents

My 2 cents to me and Confucius overdose

Confucius said, “To merely know is nothing compared to being interested
to know, being interested to know is nothing compared to deriving joy
from learning it”

Different things pop-up when I am (trying) to study or read. And it’s
been this way since ever. But this time I want to know why it happens,
why it rarely happens when I am watching a movie or playing tennis. Why,
when I watch interesting movie or any series, I can’t stop it in the
middle and watch the remaining later.

Going by Confucius again, “He that would perfect his work must first
sharpen his tools.”, I thought I need to work on my tools.

Why do I lack concentration in reading or study?\
 With some introspection and little reading, this is what I found. It
seems like I don’t engage with the material.

How am I able to engage with movies or playing tennis?\
 I think they are couple of reasons:\
 1. Interest: Not all movies are engaging; not all tennis games at
engaging but mostly they are. What’s the reason?\
 2. Relation: I wouldn’t mind watch 3 hours Bollywood movie or 4 hours
Tennis matches or may be whole day of Cricket but I don’t think I could
ever watch “curling”. Reason for that, I don’t have appreciation for
that game. Why? Because I don’t know what’s so special about it. I don’t
know the history of it. I can’t relate myself with it.\

[![curling](http://sideproject.me/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/curling-300x241.jpg)](http://sideproject.me/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/curling.jpg)\
 3. Practice to Play/Learn: This goes back to first 2 points, when I am
not interested and it doesn’t relate to me; I really don’t care to spend
time practice or learn. Like anything, studying and reading are
activities with different levels and one can get better if the basics
are sound and practicing it would make foundation solid. If the basics
are not strong and if we are working with advanced level then
frustration is natural. This leads to the next point.\
 4. Suck at it: Now that I know I suck at it, I generally give up. The
frustration and disgust creeps in and stays. Whenever I think about
reading again, the feeling associated with it comes back on the surface
and without even starting, I just give up mentally.

How to overcome this?\
 This is what I have been trying:\
 1. Starting small\
 a. Reading material: Trying to find easy to understand and small (under
150 pages) reading material. Finishing these materials give me
confidence.\
 b. Time: Give myself little goals like to read 5 pages every day. Then
read 10 pages. Then read 10 pages in 20 mins etc. This has helped a lot.
Breaking the book 10 – 20 pages a day is really helpful. And I am
excited to come back to the book again to read what might happen again.

2\. Actively Engaging: I am doing some investigation in advance to start
of my reading journey. This is really helping in painting the mental
canvas when I read. I am able to put things in context, relate to them
and understand better. This process is still under process and I really
hope that I continue this. How am I doing this:\
 a. Knowing the Author: This is really cool. The other day, I was just
reading about Charles Dickens. His life stories, struggles, motivations,
and his styles. “The Great Expectation” made more sense to me. I can see
Dickens telling story, I can see his story in the Novel. It’s
unbelievable how my perspective changed, just by knowing more about the
author.\
 b. Knowing the plot/context of the reading material: Try to find
resources which can give little idea what the book is about, what is
setting, important characters, etc. It gets me ready for the book, I
know what to expect.\
 c. Relate more: I am excited to know about the details. I ask how, why,
where, things are happening. I feel by this I kind of make connection
with the text. Asking questions definitely makes reading active and
engaging.\
 d. Taking notes: This is still under process, I haven’t been good a
taking notes. One of my biggest note-taking flaws is that I write down
all the important looking text from the book I am reading. And this what
happens:\
 i. I am putting more effort in making notes than reading\
 ii. My notes are exact copy of the book ( basically waste of time)\
 iii. Loose the joy of reading.

These are the things I intend to do:\
 i. Write down words and sentences and not worry about making the
perfect notes\
 ii. Write my question and try to find answers\
 iii. Explain in my own words

e\. Ponder what I read; what my takeaways from the book are. Can I
explain to someone what I read?

Like Confucius said, “He, who learns but does not think, is lost. He who
thinks but does not learn is in great danger.”

Articles:\

http://www.myrkothum.com/the-7-habits-of-highly-effective-people-1-private-victory/\
 http://calnewport.com/\
 http://www.scotthyoung.com/blog/

