Title: gmat structure and scoring explained
Date: 2014-01-07 14:47
Author: sideproject
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: gmat-structure-and-scoring-explained

The Revised GMAT June 2012 — Exam Structure\
 (Total testing time: 3 hrs., 30 min.)

SECTION 1: AWA—Analysis of an Argument (30 minutes, 1 essay)

SECTION 2: Integrated Reasoning (30 minutes, 12 questions)

Timed break (optional)

SECTION 3: Quantitative Section (75 minutes, 37 questions)

Problem Solving (23-24 questions)\
 Data Sufficiency (13-14 questions)\
 Timed break (optional)

SECTION 4: Verbal Section (75 minutes, 41 questions)

Sentence Correction (14-15 questions)\
 Critical Reasoning (14-15 questions)\
 Reading Comprehension (4 passages, 12-14 questions)

AWA—Analysis of an Argument (30 minutes, 1 essay topic)

During this exam section you'll compose an essay in which you critique a
one-paragraph argument in terms of both its logical cogency and the
strength of the evidence used to support it. The testing system will
select your Argument-Analysis prompt randomly from a large pool; you
won't be able to choose among prompts.

To record your response you must use the word processor built into the
testing system. Handwritten responses are not allowed.

The Integrated-Reasoning Section

The revised GMAT exam introduces a new 30-minute section called
Integrated Reasoning. This new section is designed to gauge your ability
to interpret, analyze and evaluate textual and graphical information
presented in realistic, business-related formats. Test takers are
awarded a separate score for this new section, on a 0-8 scale — as
distinguished from the 0-60 scale used for the Quantitative and Verbal
sections.

The Quantitative Section (75 minutes, 37 questions)

This multiple-choice section is designed to measure your basic math,
algebra and geometry skills, your understanding of basic quantitative
concepts, and your ability to reason quantitatively, solve quantitative
problems and interpret graphical data. Each Quantitative question will
conform to one of two different formats: either Problem Solving or Data
Sufficiency (questions in the two formats are intermingled):

Problem Solving (23-24 questions): Questions in this format require you
to work to a solution, which will appear among the five answer choices.\
 Data Sufficiency (13-14 questions): Each question in this format
consists of a question followed by two statements (labeled 1 and 2).
Your task is to determine whether the information provided in the two
statements suffices to answer the question. The five answer choices are
the same for each and every Data-Sufficiency question.

he GMAT Quantitative Section — Skills Tested and Math Topics Covered

The GMAT CAT includes one Quantitative section. Here are the key
features of this exam section:

Time limit: 75 minutes

Exam section number: Section 3 (the third of four exam sections)

Number of questions: 37 available questions (approximately 2 minutes per
question, on average)

Basic format: All questions are multiple choice (five choices)

Skills tested:

Your basic math and algebra skills\
 Your understanding of basic quantitative concepts\
 Your ability to reason quantitatively, solve quantitative problems and
interpret data presented graphically\
 Knowledge Levels and Math Topics Covered

The GMAT Quantitative section covers quantitative concepts typically
covered in basic high-school math coursework. It does not cover
trigonometry, calculus or other advanced math topics.

A GMAT Quantitative question might involve any of the math topics listed
below. The number of questions from each broad category (in bold face)
can vary slightly from the ranges indicated here because some questions
will fit into more than one category.

<em>Arithmetic, number theory, statistics (14-15 questions)\
 arithmetical operations\
 the number line and ordering\
 integers, factors and multiples\
 decimals, percentages, and ratios\
 exponents and square roots\
 mean, median, mode, range, standard deviation\
 basic probability\
 number patterns (series, permutations, factorials)\
 Interpretation of graphical data (3-5 questions)

tabular data (tables)\
 line charts, bar charts and scatter charts\
 pie graphs\
 Algebra (11-12 questions)

operations on variables\
 factorable binomials and polynomials\
 algebraic equations\
 algebraic functions\
 algebraic inequalities\
 Geometry (6-8 questions)

lines and angles\
 triangles, quadrilaterals and other polygons\
 properties and characteristics of circles\
 3-dimensional solids\
 coordinate geometry</em>

The Verbal Section (75 minutes, 41 questions)\
 This multiple-choice section includes the following three different
question types, which are intermingled rather than grouped separately.
Every Verbal question comes with five answer choices.\
 Sentence Correction (14-15 questions): These questions are designed to
gauge you command of the English language and the conventions of
standard written English, including grammar, syntax (sentence structure)
and diction — but not punctuation. For each question your task is to
determine which among five versions of a sentence is the best example of
proper grammar and effective expression.\
 Critical Reasoning (14-15 questions): These questions are designed to
gauge your ability to understand, critique, and draw reasonable
conclusions from arguments. Each argument is presented in a brief (one-
or two-paragraph) passage of text.\
 Reading Comprehension (12-14 questions): These questions are designed
to measure your ability to read carefully and accurately, to determine
the relationships among the various parts of a reading passage, and to
draw reasonable inferences from the information in the passage. The
questions are presented in sets of 3-4, each set based on the same 150
to 350-word passage of text.

The Two Timed Breaks

The GMAT testing system provides two timed breaks:

The first break comes after Section 2 (Integrated Reasoning) — i.e.,
after 60 minutes of actual exam time.

The second break comes after Section 3 (the Quantitative section) —
i.e., after another 75 minutes of actual exam time.

Both breaks are optional; you may terminate either break at any time and
proceed to the next test section.\
 Immediately after each timed break the next test section will
automatically begin. So if you take too long a break, the additional
time will be deducted from the next test section.

**The Score Report**

An official GMAT score report consists of five parts:

1\. Verbal Scaled Score (on a scale from 0 to 60)\
 2. Quantitative Scaled Score (on a scale from 0 to 60)\
 3. Total Scaled Score (on a scale from 200 to 800)\
 4. Analytical Writing Assessment (AWA) Score (on a scale from 0 to 6)\
 5. Integrated Reasoning Score (on a scale from 1 to 8)

The total score is a scaled combination of the verbal and quantitative
scaled scores, and thus reflects a student’s overall performance on the
multiple-choice sections of the test. The AWA and the Integrated
Reasoning sections are scored independently; scores for these sections
do not affect the 200-800 scaled score.

**The Verbal and Quantitative Sections**

To compute the scaled score for the Verbal and Quantitative sections,
GMAT uses an algorithm that takes the following factors into account:

1\. number of questions answered within the time permitted\
 2. number of questions answered correctly\
 3. statistical characteristics (including level of difficulty) of the
questions answered

At the beginning of each section, the GMAT presents a question in the
middle range of difficulty. If the question is answered correctly, the
next question will be harder and the test-taker's score will adjust
upwards. If the question is answered incorrectly, the next question will
be easier, and the test-taker’s score will adjust downwards. (The test
taker does not see this adjustment because the score is not revealed
until the entire test has been completed.) Thus, the algorithm is
constantly recalculating the scaled score as the student progresses
through the section.

As a test-taker answers more questions, the algorithm receives more
information about his or her skills and is able to calculate an accurate
score with greater and greater precision. Consequently, the questions at
the beginning of the section are weighted much more heavily than
questions near the end of the section. For example, by the time Question
36 appears, the computer has had 35 questions from which to derive the
proper score range. So even if Question 36 were answered correctly, the
increase in score would be minimal compared to the increase in score if
Question 2 had been answered correctly.

References:\
 http://www.testmasters.net/gmatabout/scoring-scale\
 http://www.west.net/\~stewart/gmat/introduction.htm

